---
title: "Analyzing IRA tweets" #TODO pictogram
layout: post
date: 2019-01-21 10:00
tag:
- Data Science
- Python
- Pandas
- Spark
image: assets/images/trolltweet.png # TODO picture
image-external: false
headerImage: true
projects: true
hidden: true # don't count this post in blog pagination
description: "Analyzing tweets created by Russian trolls to influence politics in the USA and in Ukraine."
category: project
#author: johndoe
externalLink: false
---

Analyzing tweets created by Russian trolls to influence politics in the USA and in Ukraine.
[Read the full data story.](https://abaracadacabara.github.io)

---

For the final project of the [Applied Data Analysis](https://dlab.epfl.ch/teaching/fall2018/cs401/) course at EPFL,
I worked with two friends on a [Twitter dataset](https://about.twitter.com/en_us/values/elections-integrity.html#data) containing around 10 million troll tweets written by the [Internet Research Agency (IRA)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_Research_Agency).

We wanted to dig into the data to discover a strategy behind those tweets and to determine the impact they had.
We mainly focused on posts written in English, which mostly concern American politics, and the 2016 presidential elections.
We also took a look at Russian messages, which speak a lot about Ukraine.
This allowed us to compare the behavior of the trolls in two different contexts.

The full [data story](https://abaracadacabara.github.io) contains our detailed analysis and results.

In short, we conducted our observations along three axis:
- **Temporal analysis**: We compared the activity of the trolls with the major events happening in the world.
Peaks of activity often correspond to important events: war in Ukraine, Hillary Clinton email controversy, Putin's reelection...
It also appears that the number of troll accounts grew drastically in 2014.
- **Textual analysis**: A first look at the contents of the tweets proved that the vocabulary of the trolls is different from the average user: "Trump" is their favorite word!
Then, we performed a sentiment analysis.
The results were mostly even between Trump, Obama and Hillary, although slightly more positive towards Trump.
However, when comparing Russia and Ukraine, we can see that the trolls are much more negative towards Ukraine.
- **Relationships analysis**: We observed the relations of the trolls both with other trolls and with the rest of Twitter through retweets.
There is a clear difference of behavior between the two "species".
Russian speaking accounts focus on spreading (fake) news issued by Russian media agencies.
Interestingly, most of those agencies have undergone major changes around 2014.
English speaking trolls attempt to look more human, they do not talk exclusively about politics.
They are also much more diverse: there are different categories of accounts, with different political opinions.

As a conclusion, we found it was hard to really measure the impact of IRA, although we could see they managed to spread their messages outside of their network.
Some trolls even [interacted with relatives of Trump](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/politics/wp/2017/11/02/at-least-five-people-close-to-trump-engaged-with-russian-twitter-trolls-from-2015-to-2017/?utm_term=.b6930f43d394).
It is however much easier to observe a clear strategy behind the tweets.
Russian speaking accounts attempt to flood Twitter with propaganda messages ;
English speaking accounts try to divide people by confronting conflicting opinions.
